# Bacteria


Bacteria are the prokaryotic workhorses of the wet lab. The most common species of bacteria used for routine techniques such as plasmid cloning and protein expression is *Escherichia coli* (*E. coli*), with countless others harnessed for their unique chemistry and thus their ability to carry out biocatalysis. For the sake of this practical guide, we will focus only on *E. coli*.

## *E. coli*

*Escherichia coli*, or more commonly referred to as *E. coli* is the most common bacteria for routine lab use. It is a **facultative anaerobe**, meaning it can tolerate anaerobic environments such as the human digestive tract. It is a **Gram negative** bacteria, which means it does not retain Gram stain, and it is flagellated (although some strains are engineered to remove flagellar genes). Their growth is optimal at 37 ºC in oxic conditions and survives on a large number of substrates.

### *E. coli* domestication

The most common laboratory strain of *E. coli* was isolated from a convalescent patient with diphtheria and was named **K-12**. K-12 originally possessed an **F-pilus** gene (allowing for sharing of genetic material), and the temperate (lysogenic) **𝞴-phage**, making it difficult to reliably use as a genetic workhorse. After removing the F-pilus and its phage infection, it was renamed MG1655 and has become ubiquitous in molecular biology laboratories. Over time, MG1655 was engineered extensively to fill specific niches in the lab, allowing it to perform well in tasks such as plasmid cloning and protein engineering.

## Aseptic technique

Bacteria are all around us: on our skin, on the lab benches, and inside plastic and glassware. Propagating a **monoculture** of E. coli has become a routine task in the wet lab, but requires some special procedures to ensure cultures are not contaminated. This is called **aseptic technique** and is a staple not only of bacterial cell culture, but mammalian cell culture as well. At its core, aseptic technique involves a series of practices and procedures that acts to minimize contamination of a bacterial culture with undesired organisms like fungi, viruses, bacteriophages, and other bacteria. The principles and application of aseptic technique varies with the context, but often uses **disinfectants** (like 70% ethanol, bleach, or isopropanol), aseptic fields generated by apparatuses like **laminar flow hoods** or **Bunsen burners**, and equipment like **autoclaves** to sterilize tools.

### Sterilization of tools

We ensure that all implements like glassware, plastic, and liquid and solid media through the process of **sterilization**. The most common way of sterilization in a molecular biology lab is the **autoclave**, which exposes contents loaded into the chamber to high heat and pressure (121 ºC and 1 atm above ambient) for 15-60 minutes. This is enough to destroy almost all (*almost*) bacteria, parasites, and viruses that are living on a sample. Autoclaves are routinely used to sterilize media like LB, glassware like culture flasks, and plastic like micropipette tips.

Occasionally, media too delicate to be sterilized using the high temperature and pressure of an autoclave is sterilized using filtration. Most bacteria are larger than 200 nm, so filters with a pore size of smaller than 200 nm are used to remove contaminants from the media. This sterilizes media without subjecting it to high temperatures and pressures.

Sometimes, delicate instruments or surfaces that cannot be autoclaved and require a higher level of disinfection than ethanol or bleach can provide. These instead are sterilized using high-intensity UV-A light. This will destroy bacterial and viral DNA and proteins and render them non-infectious.

### Disinfection

To reduce the risk of contamination from surfaces like the bench and hands, we use disinfectants to render bacteria and other microbes nonviable. The most common antibacterial agent used on surfaces is 70% ethanol, which is composed of (you guessed it) 70% ethanol by volume in water. This concentration is speculated to have higher penetration than lower or higher concentrations of ethanol, but few studies have systematically identified this as the optimal concentration. For most purposes, though, it suffices. Isopropanol is also used in place of ethanol at the same concentration.

While bacteria are killed by ethanol, their components (DNA, RNA, protein) are not destroyed completely. Further, viral RNA and DNA are often stabilized by ethanol and isopropanol. If contamination with foreign DNA or RNA is a procedural worry, we use a solution of 10% (v/v) bleach (sodium hypochlorite). Instead of simply disrupting the cellular and chemical 3D structure, this solution will oxidize DNA, RNA and protein, rendering it inactive.

### The aseptic field

A disinfected field does not remain sterile for long; surfaces are quickly colonized by bacteria floating in the air and inhabiting skin cells that are shed over time. In order to maintain the *longevity* of the aseptic field, we use equipment like laminar flow hoods or Bunsen burners to replace potentially contaminated air with heat or HEPA filters across the work surface. For bench work, **Bunsen burners** offer a small but reliable aseptic field to work in. The heat from the active flame forces air up and out instead of down, removing the possibility of contamination from above. For areas larger than 100 square centimeters, **laminar flow hoods** are used. These pieces of equipment maintain a separation between the outside and inside by fast-moving HEPA-sterilized air.

## Culturing *E. coli* in both liquid and solid substrates

### Liquid culture

There are as many liquid culture media varieties as there are bacterial strains, each offering different advantages and disadvantages. Broadly, media for *E. coli* is separated into three types: culture media, transport media, and minimal media, each chemically different from the others.

#### Culture media

For routine culture of bacterial cells, a rich, **chemically-undefined** media is sufficient. An example of this is lysogeny broth (LB), a rich culture media composed of tryptone (casein proteins digested with protease to yield small peptides), yeast extract, and sodium chloride. Since tryptone and yeast extract are complex, and the composition can vary between tubes, samples, and batches, LB would be considered a chemically-undefined media.

#### Minimal media

For culture of bacteria under strict conditions, such as when growth is dependent on the concentration of one or a few very common compounds, researchers use a **chemically defined**, or "minimal" media. This allows researchers to control the presence or amount of a common compound (such as a specific amino acid or nucleotide) during the growth process. For *E. coli*, M9 minimal media is standard. It only contains salts (sodium, potassium, phosphate, chloride, magnesium, calcium), ammonium, and a carbon source such as glucose.

#### Transport media

Researchers rarely want to keep bacterial cells in culture for extended periods of time, so a storage media is used for freezing bacterial cultures. The composition of this media varies, but it usually contains a bacterial culture in **log phase** and an anti-ice agent like glycerol at 15-25% (v/v). This prevents ice crystals from forming in bacterial cells and destroying their membranes and allows bacteria to be frozen at -80 ºC for years.

| Media | Chemically defined | Purpose | Type |
| -- | -- | -- | -- |
| Lysogeny broth (LB) | No | Routine culture of bacterial cells | Culture media |
| M9 | Yes | Growth of bacteria where composition of the media must be controlled, or one component must be left out | Minimal media |
| Freeze media | Sometimes | Long-term storage of bacterial cultures | Transport media |

### Solid culture

To grow bacteria in bulk, liquid culture is sufficient. Isolating a single **clone** is more difficult and requires changing the scaffold of the media. To accomplish separation of single clones of bacteria, researchers use bacterial plates, composed of their media of choice and the polysaccharide agar. When combined with water, agar forms a hydrogel that allows for bacterial growth on its surface and *minimal movement* which aids in isolation of single bacterial clones.

### The bacterial culture life cycle

During introductory science classes, you may have learned about the logistic curve that governs growth and carrying capacity of an ecosystem. Starting with a small number of reproducing organisms, the population will grow exponentially as one organism becomes two (or more). After some time, the carrying capacity of the ecosystem is reached, and the organisms plateau, the population hovering around this predefined capacity. With a few caveats, the logistic curve models quite well how bacteria (the organisms) grow in a culture (the ecosystem). The bacterial life cycle occurs in the following steps:

1. **Lag phase**: just after inoculation, cells are adjusting to their new growth media and are not dividing. Instead, they are synthesizing new proteins and preparing to divide.
2. **Log phase**: after some time, the population of bacteria begins to grow at an exponential rate. In order to plot this rate linearly, we take the **logarithm** of the population at each time point, thus the name **log phase**.
3. **Stationary phase**: as nutrients run out, the population reaches the carrying capacity and plateaus. The bacteria begin avoiding division and instead divert resources to stress tolerance.
4. **Death phase**: lack of nutrients, coupled with toxic waste products like organic acids, begins to take their toll on the bacteria, which begin to die.

Working with bacteria is a balance of timing: harvest bacteria too early, and there will not be enough material to work with. Harvest them too late, and the shift toward stress tolerance makes them much less amenable to transformation or engineering. If you are working with bacteria for the first time, be aware that, although they are quite robust organisms, timing is important and should be optimized.

## *E. coli* strain selection

The diversity of *E. coli* strains, like the diversity of bacteria writ large, is immense and a bit daunting. That said, for most applications, you will be using one or two strains of *E. coli* for your daily work. Below are two molecular biology techniques and the bacteria they use: cloning and protein expression.

### Cloning

Since DNA encodes the instructions of life, manipulating and altering DNA sequences is the first step to engineering biology. To do this, we undertake [molecular cloning](/subsections/cloning.md), a process by which we shuffle, cut, paste, edit, and delete sequences in a molecule of DNA. *In vitro*, we can edit DNA sequences very efficiently, but the yields of fully-formed plasmid DNA are inadequate for most *in vivo* applications. Instead, we use bacteria to synthesize and propagate plasmid DNA to improve our yield.

An ideal host bacteria has the following attributes: (i) it is easily transformed with a plasmid of interest, (ii) it grows quickly at close to ambient temperatures, (iii) it is not pathogenic, and (iv) its growth media is cheap and readily accessible. Our friend *E. coli* meets all of these criteria. Extensive engineering has gone into developing strains of the bacteria that are more amenable to hosting and replicating plasmids than their wild-type counterparts.

Wild-type *E. coli* contains several genes that make it natively inhospitable to harboring and replicating plasmids effectively. Two of the genes that reduce plasmid yield are *recA* (a recombinase that natively fixes DNA damage, but can integrate the plasmid into the bacterial genome instead of propagating it) and *endA* (an endonuclease that generates a double stranded break and degrades plasmid DNA before it can be propagated). Deletion of these genes increases plasmid yields, as more cells retain the plasmid and can therefore propagate it. Deleting these two genes yields the strain **DH5𝜶**, the most common *E. coli* strain used for cloning.

## Genetic manipulation

As previously discussed, bacterial genomes and genotypes can be manipulated using tools such as **transformation**, or introducing external genetic material into an organism. This can be simple (e.g. genetic recombination, mutagenesis) or complex (e.g. CRISPR/Cas9 editing, phage integrase). Before a bacteria can be successfully transformed, we must first do three things:

1. Ensure the bacteria are receptive to genetic manipulation.
2. Introduce the foreign DNA or mutagen to the cell.
3. Select only the cells that are transformed.

### Bacterial competence and transformation

A bacterium is described as **competent** if it can take up exogenous DNA from its environment. In nature, bacteria are constantly exchanging genetic information that can aid in environmental fitness in a process called **horizontal gene transfer**. The most common way of bacterial transformation in the environment is by the use of the F-pilus, which acts as a bridge that connects two bacteria sharing genetic information. Since most *E. coli* strains used in cloning have been engineered to lack the F-pilus genes, we instead use one of the other means of generating competent bacteria: chemical competence and electrocompetence.

A bacteria is said to have "chemical competence" if it can be transformed through the process of **heat shock**. During this process, a bacterial cell is incubated with the external DNA, the plasmid of interest, and calcium ions. The calcium ions neutralize the negative charge on both the DNA and the membrane of the bacterium, overcoming the repulsion and allowing them to be brought close to each other. The sample is then heated from 4 ºC to 42 ºC for a short period of time, generating small holes in the bacterial cell membrane and allowing the plasmid to enter the cell. After cooling, the plasmid is locked in the cell and it is considered "transformed". Chemical transformation is fast but is quite inefficient, useful for routine cloning.

A bacteria is "electocompetent" if it can be electroporated. In this technique, a bacterial culture is suspended in a solution of DNA without salts and subjected to a strong electric field. The field rips holes in the plasma membrane and forces the plasmids into the bacteria. After the field is removed, the holes heal and the bacterium is considered "transformed". Electroporation requires more intensive preparation of competent cells and is more prone to failure due to electical shorts, but boasts a very high transformation efficiency compared to chemical transformation. This is why electroporation is used for cloning large libraries of plasmids instead of individual clones.

Competent cells are always captured during early **log phase**. At this point, the cells are growing rapidly and are more receptive to external DNA than they are during stationary phase. This is why timing is again so crucial to efficient transformation.

### Selection of transformants

Immediately after transformation, the billions of bacteria in the sample are a mixed population: cells with the plasmid of interest and cells without. We are then required to *select*, somehow, the cells that were successfully transformed. In most plasmids, we include a **selection marker**, a gene that confers resistance to an antibiotic. When we apply this antibiotic to the mixed population, the cells that do not harbor the modification will die, leaving a population containing cells that were transformed successfully.
